<h1 align="center">
SQLite Encryption Extension<br>
Software Configuration Management System
</h1>

This website ([https://www.sqlite.org/see]) is where all of the source code
for the SQLite Encryption Extension (SEE) is stored and archived.  If you are
an SEE licensee, this is where you come to view and/or download the latest
SEE source code.  Selected precompile binaries are also available.

Some of the documentation on this website is open to viewing by the general
public.  However, access to the SEE source code and precompiled binaries
requires a username and password, which is available only to licensees.
Perpetual source-code licenses
are [https://www.hwaci.com/cgi-bin/see-step1|available for purchase]
separately.

This is a <u>live</u> software configuration management system.  What you
see here is exactly what the developers see.  There is no packaging.  There
is no sugar-coating.  There are no secrets.  All of our mistakes are here
in full view.  Just because code appears in this repository does not mean
that it works.  Please restrict your attention to check-ins that are tagged
with [/timeline?t=release | "release"].  
You can see a list of tags for each check-in in the timeline
and under the "Tags and Properties" subheading of the check-in information
page.  If you are in doubt about what version of SEE you should be
using, please ask.

Key links:

  *  [./readme.wiki | How To Compile And Use SEE]

  *  [/timeline?t=release | Timeline of SEE releases]

  *  [/tree?ci=release | Files in the latest release of SEE]

  *  [/vinfo/release | Information about the latest release version of SEE]

  *  [/zip/see-sources.zip?uuid=release | Download ZIP archive] or
     a [/tarball/see-sources.tar.gz?uuid=release|Tarball] of the latest
     source code.
